[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today's
video is a rather ambitious one I want to set
a direction for a large scale view of modern
geometry so I want to give you an overview
of how to think about geometry in a very general
framework so despite the rather lighthearted title
there's actually quite a serious intent in today's
lecture so when it comes to space it's important
to distinguish between our physical space the one
we live in and the mathematical spaces that we
want to create arguably there's only one physical
space the one that we live in for quite some time
for thousands of years mathematicians assume
this is true of mathematical space too this was
sort of enshrined in UK's point of view that the
mathematical space was really just an idealization
or reflection of the physical space and so that
one could argue and discover things by making
constructions in physical space and then applying
them to the mathematics so until the 1930s that is
when things started to change with the discovery
of hyperbolic geometry presenting really a new
alternative ative to the question of what is space
mathematically but in retrospect we can now see
that in fact the idea of alternate geometries
was around for a long time earlier much before
hyperbolic geometry as spherical trigonometry had
been an intense subject of Investigation since
Greek days not just the ancient Greeks also the
Hindus Arabs in fact many ancient civilizations
interested in spherical geometry because that was
the geometry of the celestial sphere the night sky
but also before the 1830s there was projective
geometry that had been developed and there
was also just a little bit before that inversive
geometry so these were alternate ways of thinking
about what geometry was and so in retrospect it
shouldn't have been that much of a surprise that
mathematically there are in fact a whole spectrum
of different geometries so in mathematics in fact
there are lots of different kinds of geometries
just like there are lots of different kinds of
pizza and I'm going to use a pizza model for
geometry because it's actually I think a quite
instructive and relatively simple-minded way
of organizing our thoughts about what are the
building blocks or ingredients for the different
kinds of geometries that are out there so let me
remind you rather simplistically that when you
make a pizza you have to make certain decisions
the first decision is probably what kind of
Base you're going to use white flour usually but
perhaps you could use other kinds of flour to make
the fundamental pizza dough after you've chosen a
base you might decide on a type of pizza whether
you're going to have a thin crust pizza or a deep
dish pizza okay so they're basically these two
different kinds of pizza that you could aim for
then you should choose a size whether you're
going to make a small one a medium one or a
large one or maybe if there's lots of people
around a family-sized pizza or maybe even
something much bigger and then perhaps the most
interesting choice is what kind of toppings
you're going to put on the pizza maybe pepperoni
or maybe mushrooms or maybe onions or maybe some
combination of them or maybe if you're a purist
no topping at all just a base with a tomato sauce
okay after that you slice the pizza up into pieces
after You' made it and then of course you consume
it so very simple kind of model involving these
sort of four types of decisions that you have to
make and we'll see that this is a good way of
trying to remember how we can structure modern
geometry all right so there's basic orientation
turns out to be useful for describing geometries
in mathematics as well so to define or to make a
geometry you choose first of all a base but it's
a base number system because these days geometry
is almost always built on top of arithmetic so
first of all you have to choose a framework for
arithmetic for us that's almost invariably the
rational numbers that for us is the fundamental
arithmetical domain with the operations of
addition multiplication subtraction and Division
and nothing else just those four operations that's
arithmetic but we've also seen occasionally
that there are other Alternatives we might
for example be interested in a finite field or
some other number system perhaps built up from
the rational maybe some kind of extension
field or in fact there's the possibility of
using some quite different kinds of arithmetic
in any case that's a starting point that's sort
of very analogous to choosing a base for making
your pizza dough then you have to choose a type
and somewhat simplistically but very good way
of thinking there's basically only two types
apine or projective these two different ways of
making a geometry just like thin crust deep dish
pizza and then there's a size or Dimension that
you get to choose whether you're working in one
dimension two dimensions three dimensions or maybe
something higher entirely analogous to the size of
the pizza you're going to make and then finally
additional structures once you have decided on
these fundamental aspects of your geometry you
then get to decide what additional structures
you're going to impose these are like toppings for
a pizza prominent amongst them are decisions about
metrical structures okay so there might be ukian
metrical structure or maybe relativistic metrical
structure there are other possibilities too these
are additional things that you impose upon this
more fundamental uh base of your geometry that
you've constructed from the first three choices
there's other things you can add too so you can
have distinguished points or distinguished lines
you might have some distinguished symmetries
you might say this reflection is going to be
U given a name and will have a special
role in the in the geometry or there
might be a conic or there might be a
cubic or there might be some additional
collection of objects that you're going to
specify as part of the definition of the
geometry there is a lot of variety possible here
okay so once we've made these different choices
well then we have a geometry and after that you
subdivide it into pieces and eat it or rather
study it all right so let's have a look at these
various ingredients separately so the first one
we've already talked quite a lot about the need to
establish a base number system the definition of
the kinds of numbers and the kinds of arithmetic
that are going to be available to you to build up
the objects of your geometry and as I pointed
out many times for us that's most of the time
the rational numbers that's sort of our default
number system so geometry in the modern approach
is definitely built upon arithmetic which is a
reversal from Millennia past it's a very modern
point of view but in order to make this work our
arithmetic must be 100% solid there's no room
at all for compromise as to the Integrity of the
arithmetic if you're going to build geometry on it
so we must have completely well-defined
Notions of what the actual numbers are
completely unambiguously defined we must know very
clearly what the arithmetical operations are make
sure they're both explicit and well defined so
they actually make sense and we have laws of
arithmetic with hopefully proofs Associated to
them we have actually demonstrated the laws of
arithmetic and all of these ought to be
underpinned by concrete non-trivial examples
you've got to be able to actually demonstrate
that you can do this arithmetic it's not just an
empty phraseology it's not just something that
happens over the hill you're actually capable
of taking out your pen pencil marker and actually
making computations for example over the rational
num is 2/3 + 57 I know how to actually make this
computation it's not just empty words I'm going
to show it to you 2 * 7 + 3 * 5 over 21 that's
the rule so 2 * 7 is 14 3 * 5 is 15 I have to add
those that's 29 divided by 3 * 7 which is 21 and
then I'm going to check to see whether there's any
reduction possible I don't have to do this but
it's nice so 29 and 21 are relatively prime so
that's the final answer I have demonstrated that
I actually know how to do addition with rational
numbers and with multiplication we can do that
as well 4 over9 * 3 over 8 well that's 12 over
19 * 8 whatever that is but let's cancel the
fours so we just have 3 over 19 * 2 which is 38
and that's the final answer so we can
demonstrate that we can do arithmetic as
opposed okay as opposed to the fairy tale world
of real numbers that everyone pays lip service
too and very few can actually demonstrate that
they actually can do the arithmetic for example
pi plus e supposedly everything in quotes is
anybody actually out there will take up the
challenge of telling us what precisely you
get when you add pi+ e I've asked you about
pi plus e plus < tk2 before that's obviously
too hard because nobody seems to be able to
compute that Force so let's simplify how about
just pi plus e and after you've done that why
don't you demonstrate that you can uh multiply
real numbers too if you're a fan tell us what
pi * e is and please don't tell us that the
answer is pi * e and don't tell us that the
answer here is Pi + e okay that would be as fasile
as me saying that the answer here is 419 * 3 8 so
real number arithmetic really doesn't cut it as
demonstrated by the lack of the ability of people
to actually do real number arithmetic it's not
a philosophical issue it's an issue of actually
being able to do the arithmetic so that's
not what we want to use to build up geometry
the rational number arithmetic there is something
solid Dependable we can all agree we all know how
to do that that's the proper foundation so now
we have a good base now what do we do so our next
choices we have to choose a type which is affine
or projective and we have to choose a dimension
choices are 1 2 3 or perhaps something higher so
it's very important understanding there are really
these two fundamentally different but related
kinds or types of geometry apine and projective
now at various points in history one or the other
will be preferred so in the 19th century people
were very enthusiastic about projective geometry
and there were many claims that projective
geometry was really the fundamental geometry in
the 20th century things changed a little bit and
apine geometry or the associated Vector space
geometry of linear algebra became dominant but
I think it's better that students of the subject
have this balanced view towards things there's an
affine point of view there's a projective point
of view they're both good points of view they're
both very powerful and they complement each other
in in nice ways and they interact naturally with
each other as well so we don't have to decide upon
which one is best but for any given geometry we
have to decide whether we're going to be talking
about afrine or projective geometry all right so
let me illustrate the kinds of choices that
we have here with this uh sort of schema here
where we start with low dimensions and work our
way up a little bit okay so in one dimension we
have aine onedimensional space or projective
onedimensional space and I remind you that an
Aline one point is just a rational number enclosed
in square brackets while a projective one point is
a proportion enclosed in square brackets and
the aine one point has a interpretation as a
point on a a line like this while a proportion
has a interpretation of corresponding to a line
in two-dimensional Aline plane okay so for
example this line here which goes through
the point 31 which is actually a point in the
aine two-dimensional plane that determines this
line which we could say is the line 3 to 1 okay
but there's additional structures really that's
are associated with these uh geometries so when
we're talking about the apine say one-dimensional
situation we're actually talking about some
further assumptions as to how the coordinates
are related to each other and there's various ways
of encoding that but one way is through symmetries
about talking about what kinds of symmetries we're
going to be interested in in terms of preserving
the structure of the underlying space and the
apine onedimensional cases characterized by
having these kinds of symmetries where we're
allowed to translate and we're also allowed
to scale so if we scale everything by a factor
of three and translate it over by five we think
of that as being essentially the same geometry
different kind of scale or a measurement a setup
but essentially the same geometry and in terms
of measurement in this kind of context well we
have this notion of relative signed lengths the
idea that this segment and this segment have a
ratio of 1 to two especially if we're talking
about directed segment and a directed segment
over here in the one-dimensional projective
situation the symmetries are a little bit more
sophisticated that turns out that they're given
by linear Transformations viewed projectively so
if we have numbers a b c d then we can consider
this linear kind of transformation that takes a
proportion X to Y and sends it to the proportion
ax + b y to CX plus d y so um we do require
that this determinant be non zero typically
and this is a kind of fundamental symmetry
that we want to build in to our projective line
and there is a fundamental measurement here which
is very very important okay which we don't have
a direct analog of here it's called the cross
ratio and we're going to have to talk about that
uh at some length it's very fundamental kind of
building block for all of projective geometry it
already arises in this one-dimensional situation
all right so one dimensional Aline one dimensional
projective this is sort of the simplest kinds of
geometries that we can build up things get more
complicated with each Dimension that we go up okay
so two-dimensional apine and projective geometry
the apine plane or the projective plane so here's
a model of the apine plane the basic objects
are these apine two points just pairs of numbers
enclosed in square brackets and we can visualize
that by setting up a coordinate system say X and
Y and note that I've purposely not made them look
perpendicular so perpendicularity doesn't play a
role for your basic fine geometry that's only
something that gets involved later on when we
introduce some toppings okay and I've also not
made the measurement here look the same as the
measurement in this direction along here we have
an aine situation so we are a able to compare that
this to this is in the ratio 1: one and here
similarly these are equally spaced but there's
no way of comparing the measurement in this
Direction with the measurement in this direction
and I illustrate that by visibly making them look
have different scales in different directions all
right so here's the point 21 which is two over
this way and one over that way and there's some
parallelogram used to define that so the notion
of parallel lines here is a key part of the fine
geometry at this stage that is built into the
apine geometry though the perpendicularity is
not in terms of symmetries well symmetries are
basically linear transformations in the sense of
vector spaces and linear algebra together
with translations so we're all to make a
linear transformation which sort of amounts to
changing the directions of these coordinate axes
and changing the scale on the coordinate axes and
we're also allowed to take the whole picture and
move it over and that's substantially not any
different the geometry doesn't substantially
change in terms of measurements well in this
two-dimensional setting we have the notion of
relative signed areas there's no notion of
absolute areas here because the symmetries
allow dilations so there's no sort of unit area
we're only allowed to compare the areas of two
oriented triangles and relative sign lengths
are available along any given line so if you
choose a line there is a notion of relative sign
length that this one is uh three times that one
over in the projective setting the projective
plane consists of proportions X to Y to Zed in
square brackets and a way of visualizing that is
to think in terms of lines in a three-dimensional
space represented by these axes x y and Zed
that's supposed to be threedimensional space
we're talking about lines through the origin in
this three-dimensional space that's our projective
plane and we're going to talk about symmetries
which are given by General linear transformations
of x y and Zed at least up to scaling as long
as the determinants are non zero and in terms of
measurements well there might be some possibility
of something that's some kind of generalization
of the cross products that I mentioned in the
uh in the uh first one-dimensional case but the
cross product is still a very important uh
ingredient that occurs along any given line
and in these contexts okay we can Define not
just points and lines but also turns out we
can talk about conics and cubics and triangles and
polygons and there's quite a lot of things that we
can introduce to the geometry without any further
additional structure just at this point here right
so the basic apine plane the basic projective
plane already very rich uh topics of geometry
but there's at this point no metrical structure
in the sense of there's no units and there's no
notion of perpendicularity yet so this is not
ukian geometry yet okay sort of prior to ukian
Geometry even though of course historically ukian
geometry came long before these geometries were
sort of envisioned okay so but nevertheless sort
of from a a mathematical structural point of view
these are more fundamental and should be
thought about as the as the pizzas just
the basic pizza made out of dough with a size
and a type decided upon so once we have these
one-dimensional and two-dimensional geometries
we can look at analoges with higher Dimensions
as well threedimensional Aline threedimensional
projective and so on and it turns out that then
there's some kind of hierarchy maybe starting
with the Aline onedimensional and then the pro
projective onedimensional and then the apine two-
dimensional and the projective two dimensional and
so on in the sense that in some sense the Aline
onedimensional space is sort of inside or can be
viewed as being inside the one-dimensional
projective space and the one-dimensional
projector space can be viewed as something sort
of inside the two-dimensional apine space fact
we saw that uh in our pictures of it so there's
uh this sort of natural interleaving of these
two geometries one after the other and um so
there's a kind of a connection they they're
not really separate things they're maybe aspects
of some big total geometry that kind of includes
all of them perhaps in addition it's important
to observe that the apine spaces like a have
Associated to them Vector spaces which are sort
of relative versions of the apine ones going back
to the last talk so instead of thinking about
two absolute points in an Aline space we can
also think about the relative position of those
two points as represented by a vector so we get
something that looks a lot like the Aline space
and is actually probably more familiar object from
the point of view of modern linear algebra so for
example the one-dimensional vector space might be
represented by a vector with just one coordinate
in round brackets and the two-dimensional Vector
space would be a vector consisting of two
rational numbers also in round brackets and so
on all right so those are our base types
of geometries and now to get more to build
something more interesting we can if we want
choose additional structure or structures now
it's important to realize that we don't have
to we can study the pure apine geometry we can
study the pure projective geometries and they
are very interesting and very fabulously uh
Rich subjects by themselves but if we want
to connect to our ukian world then we have
to impose something that makes things look more
like our ukian world in particular that there's
a notion of perpendicularity and there's a notion
of measurement being able to say that this segment
and this segment are equal whether it be length
or quad or whatever we're measuring all right so
this additional structure which is often metrical
structure is imposed upon the underlying apine or
projective spaces and there's a variety of roughly
equivalent ways of thinking about what a metrical
structure is or how to augment our base geometry
with a metrical structure so the terms that are
used are a bilinear form or a quadratic form or
an absolute conic or in fact just a symmetric
Matrix these are all roughly equivalent ways
of introducing a metrical structure and they
can be added to either an apine or projective
geometry it's a very important point which is
perhaps not as well appreciated these days as
it might be so in algebraic geometry there's a
tendency to think about metrical structure as
being most Associated to apine Geometry but
in fact projective geometry is just as capable of
supporting metrical structure as is apine geometry
just becomes a little bit more complicated but not
less interesting all right when we do this and we
do it in a good way we get Notions of quadrants
we get notion of perpendicularity and going up in
dimension we can measure higher dimensional things
quadria some kind of analog of area Quadro some
kind of squared volume spread between two uh lines
which becomes very important some kind of rational
metrical equivalent or replacement of angle and
there are more things okay there as you go up
in dimension there are more things that result
from associating a quadratic form or symmetric
Matrix or bilinear form to an underlying geometry
all this is rather abstract so let's have a look
at an example or two so a very important example
the ukian plane The Familiar arena for doing ukian
geometry from this point of view that's the apine
plane together with an additional structure of a
quadratic form given by say this Matrix 1 01 and
that quadratic form manifests itself in the notion
of quadrants of a vector so it's often easier to
describe this if we work in the associated Vector
space so the quadrants of the vector XY can be
expressed using a little bit of linear algebra
and matrix multiplication in this form or if You'
like just directly as x^2 + y^2 so this notion of
quadrants that we've talked about before can be
naturally Associated to this particular Matrix
and that's a good way of thinking about things
because then you can say well what happened
if we modify the Matrix a little bit another
way of thinking about that is to talk about
the associated by linear form where you have one
vector X1 y1 another Vector X2 Y2 and you take
the dot product or inner product which is X1 X2
+ y1 Y2 so this is something that Associates to
a pair of vectors A number rather than a number
to a single Vector another way of expressing the
same content essentially is to specify the unit
circle if we know all the vectors whose quadrants
is one then we essentially can figure out the
quadrants of anything else in comparison so the
x^2 + y^2 = 1 unit circle once we have that it
gives us the notion of quadrants and in fact it
also determines perpendicularity it's another
almost equivalent way of describing what this
metrical structure is it's allowing us to decide
when two lines are perpendicular in terms of the
unit circle perpendicularity can be thought of in
terms of as the relationship between a radius and
a tangent to The Circle at that point so that's
one way of defining what perpendicularity is
that by definition the radius and a tangent are
always perpendicular in terms of vectors this is
an example of perpendicularity 34 is perpendicular
to- 43 because if you take the product between
them you get -2 + 12 which is 0o so dot product
equals 0 is the uh algebraic manifestation of
perpendicularity so this is ukian geometry it's
what you get when you take A2 your base pizza
and you put on a single topping the topping is
basically this Matrix or one of the equivalent
ways of manifesting the the content of that Matrix
or Associated quadratic form bilinear form Circle
perpendicularity so another interesting example
is when we take that same two-dimensional Aline
plane and we impose on it a different metrical
structure as a topping where we impose a lorence
or relativistic metrical structure that's given by
a matrix which is almost the same as the previous
one except it's one 0 0- one with a minus sign
there the corresponding notion of quadrants is
different because there's a minus sign there
it's x^2 - y^2 the associated dot product or
inner product or bilinear form is different it
has the form x1x2 - y1 Y2 between two vectors
the associated unit circle has a different form
it's going to be x^2 - y^2 = 1 which in our pict
looks like this it's quite different the
associated notion of perpendicularity is
also different so in this geometry the vector 32
is perpendicular to 23 because the dotproduct is
3 * 2- 2 * 3 which is 0o geometrically it turns
out that that's uh given by the same rule that we
had in the Ean case if you have a point on the
unit circle and you look at the tangent to the
circle ccle at that point then that tangent
is perpendicular to the radius this is the
center of the circle that's a radius and so that
vector and that Vector are perpendicular in this
geometry so historically people would have said
but wait a minute this is not the right geometry
it's not the geometry of our world okay but it
turns out to be rather subtle to decide what
the geometry of our world is okay we only see
a relatively small part of the physical world
if we look at much bigger scales we look at much
smaller scales it becomes first of all hard to to
see clearly and we start seeing strange things
that we had no inkling of in our sort of scale
and as Einstein taught us in fact once we do look
in a very large scale then the geometry of the
world becomes in some sense more like this kind
of GE ometry rather than the ukian geometry of
the previous example at least when you include
time as an extra aspect of the Space story so
the the question about what the true geometry of
the physical world is is still an open question
so we need to be flexible about mathematical
geometries and not be too dogmatic that one is
preferred over the other ukian geometry has held
sway for far too long and it's only right and
proper now that we have more General approach
and try to think a little bit more widely and
broadly and flexibly about the different kinds
of geometries and their various roles all right
so this is a good starting point to think in
terms of having a topping something that you
impose upon a base apine space in this case to
produce an interesting metrical structure an
interesting metrical geometry which is different
from the ucan one but we'll share many features
of it all right now let's have a final look
at what you get when you take the projective
plane and you add symmetrical structure to it
there you get a whole different kind of variety
of interesting geometries notably including
elliptic geometry and hyperbolic geometry so
these topics are really on the projective side
of the story elliptic geometry is pretty close
to being what's often called spherical geometry
basically the study of the sphere the celestial
sky and astronomy for example and that's
obtained by taking the projective plane and
adding a projective quadratic form in this case
the projective quadratic form that's determined by
this Matrix 3x3 which has ones down the diagonal
you need a 3X3 Matrix you might think you need
a 2x2 matrix but in fact a 3X3 Matrix is the
relevant thing but it's a 3X3 Matrix sort of
up to multiple so I have square brackets here
that means that if you multiply it by a scalar
it's not supposed to change and that's because the
projective plane itself consists of tuples x to Y
to Z there's really three components there okay
so when you when you do this you get a geometry
that's sort of geometry of the sphere roughly
where a given line through the origin which is
basically your projective twoo intersects
the sphere at least approximately in two
projective plane and you add a
different projective quadratic
form one with a matrix 1 1 minus one down the
diagonal okay in this case you get um instead
of a sphere you get a sphere that looks more
like a hyperboloid of one sheet and uh you're
still looking at lines through the origin which
meet this hyperboloid in two opposing points
at least some of the time and you get what I
call Universal hyperbolic geometry which
is a very broad rethinking and extension
of classical hyperbolic geometry and roughly far
superior to it okay so there's a lot more to be
said here and um because this is a course in the
foundations of mathematics I don't want to say too
much which is sort of waffly and imprecise but
this is an overview to give you an orientation
okay I don't expect you to know what elliptic
geometry is precisely or hyperbolic geometry is
precise they want you to have a rough orientation
okay we are going to be saying precisely what all
these various things are because they're
absolutely crucial uh sort of topics in
modern geometry okay but it's good to have
an overall orientation that is that there are
lots of different kinds of geometries out there
mathematically so when we talk about points and
lines and you know measurements we really have to
do so in the context of a particular geometry it's
really necessary to start by saying let's work
in Geometry X where we remind ourselves that the
main definitions are this this this and this so we
Define the geometry and then we can work inside it
so there might very well be all these different
possibilities in fact there are these different
possibilities around so I hope this is giving you
an overall orientation we are going to add detail
to this picture but this pizza model I think will
hopefully stand you in good stead in terms of your
giving you a rough idea of the overall structure
in our next video I want to take the transition
we've been talking a lot about apine geometry now
you can see that there is all these interesting
things happening over on the projective side so
it's time that we moved over to the projective
side which is much less familiar to the modern
student projective geometry used to be a major
Topic in mathematics in the 19th and in the
early 20th centuries but uh these days it's
been very unfortunately on the decline so we
want to rest that a little bit and next time
we're going to introduce really fundamental
onedimensional projective geometry and uh
I'll have the pleasure of telling you about one of
the key formulas in this subject which is actually
one of the main formulas in all of geometry
it's the projective analog of the triple quad
formula so I hope you'll join me for that I'm
Norman wildberger thanks for listening [Music]